Questions:

Q 1. : Could you please, explain in few sentences the main idea and
results of your article [http://arxiv.org/pdf/1308.4526v4.pdf] ?

Kurt Gödel (1906-1978) proposed an argumentation formalism to prove
the existence of God. Attempts to prove the existence (or
non-existence) of God by means of abstract, ontological arguments are
an old tradition in western philosophy.  Before Gödel, several well
known philosophers, including St. Anselm, Descartes and Leibniz, have
presented similar arguments. What motivated Gödel as a logician was
the question, whether it is possible to deduce the existence of God
from a small number of foundational axioms and definitions, with a
mathematically precise and logically formal argumentation chain.

What Bruno Woltzenlogel Paleo from TU Vienna and I did was to
formalize Kurt Gödel's argument for God's existence on a computer and
to verify it automatically. From Gödel's premises, the computer then
proved: there exists God.  "Automated theorem proving" is the
mathematical discipline where such automated systems are
developed. Interestingly, the theorem provers also found some new
results about Gödel's argument.

In theoretical philosophy, formal logical confrontations with such
proofs of God's existence had been so far (mainly) limited to paper
and pen.  Up to now, the use of computers was prevented, because the
"logics" of the available theorem proving systems were not expressive
enough to formalize the abstract concepts adequately. Gödel's proof
uses, for example, a complex higher-order modal logic to handle
concepts such as "possible" and "necessary" and to support
quantification over individuals and properties.

Current works of myself and Larry Paulson from Cambridge University,
UK, show that many expressive logics, including higher-order modal
logics, can be embedded into the classical higher-order logic, which
can thus be seen as a universal logic. For this universal logic,
efficient automated theorem provers have been developed in recent
years, and these systems were now employed in our work.


Q 2. : When did you get the idea to work on Gödels ontological proof in "automated way"?

I have been challenged by the idea since about 6 years. It was
actually Melvin Fittings book on "Types, Tableaus, and Gödel's God"
that initially raised my interest. In the last few years I have then
been working on embeddings of various expressive logics in classical
higher-order order logics. My main goal thereby was to support
improved reasoning technology for various applications, for example, in
artificial intelligence.  But clearly, this research also paved the
way for tackling the ontological argument with computer
technology. End of 2012, I then met Bruno Woltzenlogel Paleo in
Vienna, where I presented this research to the Kurt Gödel
society. Bruno was highly interested in formalizing the ontological
argument for personal reasons (he went though some very hard time end
of 2012), and he wanted to present a formalization of Gödel's
ontological proof as a gift to a priest back home in Brazil. He then
contacted me in early 2013 and we decided to jointly work on the
formalization and automation of the ontological argument. From the
very beginning it was very clear to both of us, that the
computer-based formalization and automation of Gödel's ontological
argument was of major scientific interest for various reasons. Most
importantly, we provide a significant novel contribution towards a
computer-supported theoretical philosophy. Remember that such a
computational view on philosophy was already pictured by Leibniz.


Q 3. : Is there a story behind creation of the article/code?

Well, yes, and part of the story has already been mentioned above. We
succeeded with the first automated proof of Dana Scott's version of
Gödel's ontological argument in early July 2013, and it was actually
LEO-II, my own higher-order theorem prover, which did prove the result
first. Subsequently we reproduced the results with other systems. At
the very beginning, I wasn't sure which publishing strategy we should
follow. Bruno convinced me that uploading our entire work on GitHub
would be the right way to proceed. Raul Rojas at Freie Universität
Berlin, whom I had briefly told about our successful work, then
prepared the Telepolis/Heise interview with me. And at the same time
we did submit the two page article to the arXiv repository in
order to have a first reference available.  We will, of course, add
further publications in the near future; one has already appeared:
http://afp.sourceforge.net/entries/GoedelGod.shtml. Others are
submitted. These future papers will explain our work and its
implications in more depth to different target communities.



Q 4. : What were the reactions after publishing? Were there a lot of them?

Yes, there were strong reactions. In particular, the Telepolis
interview (http://www.heise.de/tp/artikel/39/39766/1.html) and the
Spiegel Online article(s) triggered such strong reactions.  In fact,
the interview on Telepolis was amongst their top ten most read
articles in 2013. I assume that a similar statement can be made for
some other reports on our work. Many of the reactions to our work were
rather irrational, and often they revealed a lack of knowledge in the
readers about the nature and role of the ontological argument in
philosophy and theology, or they showed a lack of knowledge about
formal logic and theorem proving. Other reactions were highly
interesting and inspiring. We also got some highly valuable feedback
from expert philosophers, and we have started some very fruitful
discussions with them. Moreover, we got contacted by a bishop from the roman
catholic church, and Bruno met him in Vienna.


Q 5. : Were there also funny or surprising ones?

Well, yes, there are many funny forum comments on the various
websites that reported on our work. I also got contacted by several
people who presented me their own theories on essential and
fundamental questions about the world and about God. Unfortunately, I
do not have the resources and the time to comment on all of these
requests. Often I have to respond to them that my core
interests (so far) have been on the pure logical aspects of the
ontological argument.



Q 6. : The project was published at GitHub in open source form.  Did
many people download (/use) your code? Did somebody modify it in any
way? Is there some contribution of community actually?

Unfortunately such statistics data has only recently been made
available on GitHub as it seems. This is pity, and I would actually like
to know these numbers as well. However, I know from many students at
my university that they have downloaded the sources and worked with
them. Some students have recently contacted me with some interesting
comments and developments. Generally, we would like to invite
interested researchers worldwide to join our
initiative. Unfortunately, there is still a fair amount of
logic training required to fully master the code.



Q 7. : Do you, personally, believe in God? What is your
"position/mind" in this field?  Note: you can skip this question, if
it is too personal for you.

I grew up in a religious family; thus my background can be classified
as religious. As a scientist, however, I have developed a purely
rational attitude, also regarding fundamental questions as we discuss them
here. In fact, my personal belief didn't and doesn't play a role in
our work on Gödel's ontological argument. The driving element for me
has rather been a deep interest in the logical peculiarities of
Gödel's proof and also my growing fascination for the field of
metaphysics. But I have to admit that I am in favor of a positive
answer to the question of the existence of God. Unfortunately,
however, Gödel's proof appears not yet fully convincing to me, since
there is some justified criticism regarding some of his axioms. A very
interesting question now is whether our technology can eventually help
to further analyze and improve the argument.



Q 8. : What are topics/subject that you are currently working on? Or
plan to work?

I am currently working on basically four interconnected research
directions:

-- Six years ago I have started studying to what extent classical
   higher-order logic can be exploited as a universal logic. The idea
   is to embed other challenging logics in classical higher-order logics
   and to apply higher-order automated theorem provers to
   them. Higher-order modal logic, as required in Gödel's ontological
   argument, is just one example. Another, even more interesting logic
   that can be easily embedded is higher-order conditional logic. Also
   security logics can be automated this way. And most interestingly,
   combinations of these logics and even parts of their meta-theory
   can be formalized and automated.

-- Together with a group of students I am about to start a
   re-implementation of my LEO-II theorem prover; I just received some
   funding from the German National Research Foundation (DFG) to carry
   out this project. The new system will be called LEO-III. Ideally, I
   want to optimize LEO-III for the automation of logic embeddings,
   including the logics as required for automating arguments in theoretical 
   philosophy.

-- Together with Bruno Woltzenlogel Paleo I want to formalize a range of
   variations of the ontological argument. In fact, we would like to
   formalize major parts of the textbook by Sobel on "Logic and
   Theism". Moreover, we want to try to further improve Gödel's
   ontological argument. Currently we try to raise funds for such a
   project.

-- In order to create a larger community we need to significantly
   improve the user interfaces of our reasoning tools. So far they are
   suitable only to expert users. Ideally, we should develop a powerful
   and easy to use reasoning framework for applications in theoretical
   philosophy. This is another research direction for which I would
   like to raise funds and create a strong team.



