== Automated Verification and Reconstruction of Gödel's Proof of God's Existence ==

Attempts to prove the existence (or non-existence) 
of God by means of purely logical arguments are an 
old tradition in philosophy and theology, 
dating back at least to 1078 a.C., when Saint 
Anselm of Canterbury proposed his famous ontological
argument. The proof proposed by the Austrian logic genius Kurt Gödel (1906-1978) is a modern culmination
of this tradition, following particularly the 
footsteps of Leibniz. 

Gödel worked on the proof for decades and shared a 
two-page manuscript with Dana Scott in 1970. 
There Gödel defines God as a being 
who possesses all positive properties. 
"Positiveness" of a property is a primitive notion 
in Gödel's theory: it is the only concept left
undefined; however, its meaning is not arbitrary, 
but constrained by five reasonable (but certainly debatable) axioms. 
They are:

A1) Either a property or its negation is positive, but not both

A2) A property necessarily implied
by a positive property is positive

A3) The conjunction of any number of positive properties is positive

A4) Positive properties are necessarily positive

A5) Necessary exemplification of an individual's essences is a positive property. (and a property is an essence of an individual if it necessarily implies any property possessed by the individual)

For the derivation of the main theorem (T3: necessarily, God exists), the following few auxiliary lemmas are proposed:

T1) Positive properties are possibly exemplified.

C1) Possibly, God exists

T2) Being god is an essence of any God

L2) If God's existence is possible, 
then it is necessary


The computer-assisted verification of Gödel's proof by 
Bruno Woltzenlogel Paleo, at the Technische Universität Wien, 
and Christoph Benzmüller, at the Freie Universität Berlin, 
established a new bridge between computer science and theoretical
philosophy and theology, two fields that had so far remained mostly
untouched by advances in artificial intelligence.

Up to now, the use of computers for metaphysical investigations had been
hindered by the lack of expressiveness of the logical languages 
employed by 
the available theorem proving systems. Gödel's proof, for example, 
requires a complex higher-order modal logic to adequately formalize
adverbs such as "possibly" and "necessarily", to allow quantification over 
properties, and to reason about their positiveness. However, the manuscript 
does not contain detailed proofs of all the intermediary steps. 

To overcome this challenge, the employed solution consisted of embedding 
modal logic into higher-order logic, according to techniques described in 
previous works by Christoph Benzmüller and Lawrence Paulson, 
and then using 
existing higher-order automated and interactive theorem proving systems 
such as LEO-II, Satallax, Coq, Isabelle and Nitpick. The result is: not 
only we now know for sure that God's necessary existence indeed follows 
from Gödel's axioms, but in the process of achieving this result a 
flexible 
infra-structure for reasoning with very expressive modal logics has been 
developed. This infra-structure can now be used for more mundane problems 
as well.

Gödel's manuscript does not contain detailed proofs for the lemmas and 
theorems it states. It is full of gaps, and hence it can be considered 
more a proof sketch than an actual proof. The verification required all 
gaps to be filled, and the fully automatic accomplishment of this task 
attests the maturity of our current theorem proving technology. 

Yet, there is still plenty of room for improvement. 
Although the automated theorem provers are able to fill 
the gaps between the lemmas and the final theorem, 
they are not yet able to prove the final theorem directly from the 
axioms without the help of the auxiliary lemmas, even when executed 
in powerful hardware such as the Vienna Scientific Cluster. This is 
evidence that Gödel's proof is non-trivial and may be used as a benchmark 
to measure the progress in automated reasoning in the near future.

The automated reasoning tools were also capable of quickly 
obtaining various new results 
of philosophical interest about Gödel's proof. They determined, 
for example, that Gödel's original axioms were actually inconsistent, 
but Scott's correction of the definition of essence makes them consistent. 
They showed that the weak modal logic KB is sufficient for Gödel's proof, 
and contrary to popular belief, 
the stronger modal logic S5 is not necessary. 
And they even confirmed Sobel's controversial criticism known as modal collapse.

This work illustrates the potential for a new 
computer-assisted theoretical philosophy, 
where the critical discussion of the underlying 
concepts and the acceptance of the proposed definitions and axioms 
remains a human responsibility, but computers can 
help us to reach correct conclusions more quickly and avoiding 
mistakes of a logical nature. In case of controversies, a computer 
can check the competing arguments and partially fulfill Leibniz' dictum:
Calculemus --- Let us calculate!
