Computer proves the Existence of God

The genius of logic Kurt Gödel (1906-1978) proposed an argumentation
formalism to prove the existence of God.
Now it was possible for Christoph Benzmüller, researcher at the FU
Berlin in the Dahlem Center for Intelligent Systems, in cooperation with
Bruno Woltzenlogel Paleo at the TU Wien, to formalize Kurt Gödel's
argument for God's existence on a computer and to verify it automatically. 
From Gödel's premises, the computer then proved: there exists God. 
"Automated theorem proving" is the mathematical discipline where 
such automated systems are developed.

Attempts to prove the existence (or non-existence) of God by means of 
abstract, ontological arguments are an old tradition in Philosophy. 
Before Gödel, already St. Anselm,
Descartes und Leibniz have presented similar arguments. What motivated Gödel as a logician
was the question, whether it is possible to deduce the existence of God from a small number of (debatable)
foundational axioms and definitions, with a mathematically precise and logically formal argumentation chain.

The core proposition, the necessary existence of God, 
was divided in four argumentation steps, as proposed by Gödel, and each
step was proved and verified with an automated theorem prover. Also the 
consistency of the axioms and definitions was analyzed and established 
automatically with the help of a computer.

In theoretical philosophy, formal logical confrontations with such 
proofs of God's existence had been so far limited to paper and pen. 
Up to now, the use of computers was prevented, because the "logics"
of the available theorem proving systems were not expressive enough 
to formalize the abstract concepts adequately. Gödel's proof
uses, for example, a complex higher-order modal logic to handle
concepts such as "possible" and "necessary".

Current works of Christoph Benzmüller and Larry Paulson
(Cambridge University, UK) show that many expressive logics, 
including higher-order modal logics, can be embedded into the classical
higher-order logic, which can be seen as a universal logic. For this universal logic,
efficient automated theorem provers have been developed in recent years,
and these systems were now employed in the work of Benzmüller and Woltzenlogel-Paleo.

Their chosen approach opens new perspectives for a 
computer-assisted theoretical philosophy. The critical discussion of the underlying 
concepts, definitions and axioms remains a human responsibility. But the computer can 
help to avoid mistakes of a logical nature: the computer can check the aurgumentation chain
and partially fulfill Leibniz' dictum in case of logical disputes:
Calculemus --- Let us calculate!